---
title: "Gherkin Tips & Tricks"
date: 2016-11-03T15:27:17+06:00
draft: false
# page title background image
bg_image: "images/backgrounds/page-title.jpg"
# meta description
description : "Post about Gherking tips"
# post thumbnail
image: "images/blog/post-1.jpg"
# post author
author: "Chris Van Bael"
# taxonomy
categories: ["Testing"]
tags: ["Testing", "Gherkin", "Cucumber", "Tips", "Automation"]
# type
type: "post"
---




A few months ago, I was selected to give a presentation at the [Testnet](https://www.testnet.org/testnet/home) ‘voorjaarsevenement’. My talk was about Gherkin and how to improve your Feature files and step definitions.  It’s time to put it on the blog.

Instead of writing an introduction to Gherkin, it’s better to point you to the [Cucumber wiki](https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber/wiki/Gherkin). They have a very good explanation of it. So let’s move on to the tips & tricks!
## Feature file tips

* **Avoid long descriptions**  
    Features should have a short and sensible title and description. This improves readability and you do want readable and understandable Feature files, don’t you? So there should be one sentence describing the scope and content.  
* **Choose a single fomat**  
    I don’t care if you pick 
	`As a [role], I want [feature] so that [benefit]`  
	or
    `In order to [benefit], as a [role] I want [feature]`.  
	However, pick one and stick with it. Again, this improves the readability.   
	And never forget the benefit, this makes it easier to decide on the business value.
* **Features… not big portions of the application**  
    There should only be one Feature per file and the Feature should be reflected in the file name. If you work in larger teams, it is easier to work parallel on smaller Feature files.  
* **Domain language**  
    Involve the customers and use their domain language. Involve them in writing the user stories or at least have them review them. Keep the language consistent accross all Features (and even projects).
* **Organization**  
    Organize your Features and Scenarios with the same discipline like you would organize code. You can organize them according to execution time: fast (<1/10s), slow (<1s) or glacial (>1s).  Or put them in separate subdirectories. Or tag them.  

## Background tips

* **Use Backgrounds**  
    To avoid repetitions in the feature file, Backgrounds are ideal. However, since the user has to keep the Background in mind while reading or writing the Scenarios, keep them short. Max. 4 lines.
* **Don’t include technical stuff**  
    The Feature file is about the user. Starting or stopping the webserver, clearing tables, etc can be implemented in the Step Definitions. it shouldn’t be mentioned in the background.  
    Of course, don’t use a Background if you have only one Scenario.
* **Don’t mix**  
    Don’t mix backgrounds in the Feature file with @before hooks in the Step Definitions. This will drive you nuts when debugging.

## Scenario tips

* **Scenario vs Scenario Outline**  
    In fact it is very simple: if you have only one example, use a Scenario.  
    If you have more than one example, use a Scenario Outline and a table
* **Short**  
    Keep your scenarios short.  
	Hide the implementation details.
* **Declarative steps over imperative steps**  
    Using declarative steps is much more concise and about WHAT the user wants to do with the system, not HOW the user wants to do it.  
    Declarative example:  
    `Given I have logged on to the system`    
    `Then I should see my new messages`  
    Imperative example:  
    `Give I am on the login page`  
    `When I fill in the username`  
    `And I fill in the password`  
    `And I click on the ‘Submit’ button`  
    `Then I should be logged on to the system`  
    `And I should see my new messages`  

## Step tips

* **AND/OR are keywords**  
    so don’t use them within a step  
    `Given I’m on the homepage and logged on`  
    should be  
    `Given I’m on the homepage`  
    `And I’m logged on`
* **Cover happy and non-happy paths**  
    Testing is more than only proving it works. It’s trying to break the system.
* **Refactor**  
    Your library of steps will increase in time, so try to generalize your steps to increase reuse.  
    You understanding of the domain will increase also, so update your language and the steps.

## Tag Tips

* **Never tag the background**  
    Tags allow you to organize your Features and Scenarios.  
	You can have multiple Tags per Feature or Scenario, so never tag the Background.  
* **Don’t tag Scenario with same Tag as Feature**  
    Feature Tags are also valid for all child Scenarios, so there is no need to apply the same Tag to the Scenarios.  
* **What is the benefit of Tagging a Feature**  
    You can Tag individual Scenarios, so think about what value would be added by Tagging an entire Feature.  There may not be much use for it. Except perhaps Tagging the Feature with the story number.  
* **Tag categories**  
    Possible tag categories may be  
    Frequency of execution: *@checkin, @hourly, @daily, @nightly*  
    Dependencies: *@local, @database, @fixtures, @proxy*  
    Level: *@acceptance, @smoke, @sanity*  
    Environment: *@integration, @test, @stage, @live*  
    Some groups also Tag according to progress: *@wip, @todo, @implemented, @blocked*  
    I’m not saying this is bad, if you do, make sure you keep the tags up-to-date! If you can’t do that, don’t use them.  

## Step Definition Tips

Most of the tips below will increase the reuse of your Step Definitions and the readability of the Feature files.

* **Use flexible pluralization**  
    Add a ? after the pluralized word:  
    `Then /^the users? should receive an email$/ do`  
    Now it will match both user and users
* **Use non-capturing groups**   
    Instead of `(some text)`,  
	use `(?:some text)`.  
	Now the result is not captures and not passed as an argument to your step definition.
    It is especially useful in combination with alternation:  
    ```
	When /^(?I|they) create a profile%/
	```    
    or  
    ```
	And /^once the files? (?:have|has) finished processing*/ do
	```      
* **Consolidate Step definitions**  
    ```
	When /^the file is (not)? present$/ do |negate|  
        negate ? check_if_file_is_not_present : check_if_file_is_present
    end
	```    
* **Use unanchored regular expressions**  
    Normally you anchor start with ^ and end with $.  
	Sometimes it might be useful to omit one:  
    ```
	Then /^wait (\d+) seconds/ do |seconds|
        sleep(seconds.to_i)
    end
	```    
    This will allow for more flexible expressive steps:  
    ```
	Then wait 2 seconds for the calculation to finish  
    Then wait 5 seconds while the document is converted
	```    
    Of course this can be dangerous, so I think you can only do this for this example 😉
* **Be DRY**  
    Don’t Repeat Yourself.  
    Refactor when necessary and reuse Step Definitions within a project across Features and perhaps even across projects.
* **Parse date/time in a natural way**  
    For most programming languages there are libraries that allow you to parse dates and times in a more natural way. For example in Ruby you have [Chronic](https://github.com/mojombo/chronic) and in Python you can use [parsedatetime](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/parsedatetime/) or [pyparsing](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyparsing).  
&nbsp;

So there we have it: quite a few tips to improve your Gherkin Feature files, Backgrounds and Step Definitions.

However, most important tip I can give you is to exercise discipline when writing your test automation code:

* treat your code as production code
* refactor when necessary
* run your tests as often as possible
* and don’t be too smart: somebody needs to understand next year. And that person might even be you.  
&nbsp;

For your benefit I have included [my presentation (pdf)](/files/blog/Gherkin-Tips-Tricks.pdf)
 and [the checklists I created (pdf)](/files/blog/Gherkin-Checklists.pdf).


